Page 1:
TEACHER'S NOTES Email Etiquette Activity Type Reading, matching and writing exercises Focus Email etiquette Job application emails Aim To learn and practice email etiquette for formal emails. Preparation Make one copy of the two-page worksheet for each student. Level Intermediate (B1) Time 50 minutes Introduction In this email etiquette worksheet, students learn and practice email etiquette for formal emails. Procedure Give each student a copy of the two-page worksheet. To start, students read an email and match each part of the email to its correct title. Exercise A - Answer key 1. f 2. b 3. e 4. c 5. d 6. a Next, students read rules about formal email etiquette and circle the correct answers, should or shouldn't. Exercise B - Answer key 1. should 2. should 3. shouldn't 4. shouldn't 5. should 6. should 7. shouldn't 8. shouldn't 9. shouldn't 10. should Students then answer multiple-choice questions about greetings and closing salutations by ticking the correct answers. Exercise C - Answer key 1. a, c 2. a, b After that, the students read a job application email and circle all the mistakes. Exercise D - Answer key Mistakes include: 1. full sentence in the subject 2. informal greeting 3. no spaces between paragraphs 4. contractions used throughout 5. capitalised word 6. exclamation mark 7. informal closing statement 8. first name only used in signature Lastly, the students write their own job application email to the same advertisement using the correct email etiquette. T each-This.com © 2021 Permission granted to reproduce for classroom use. WORKSHEETS, ACTIVITIES & GAMES

Page 2:
EMAILING Email Etiquette A. Read the job application email. Then, match each part of the email to its correct title using the letters on the left side of the email. To: normanbooth@travelwellhotel.org From: apeterson@gmail.com a. Subject: Receptionist Position b. Dear Mr. Booth, c. I am looking for employment and would like to apply for the position of receptionist at your hotel which was advertised on the Getajob website. d. I am a 22-year-old hospitality graduate with a degree in hotel management. I have experience working in hotels, both in the UK and abroad, in a variety of different roles. I am fluent in French and German and speak conversational Spanish too. I believe I would be a suitable candidate for the job as I enjoy working with people. I have excellent communication skills and work well in a busy environment. e. I look forward to hearing from you. f. Yours faithfully, Alice Peterson 1. closing salutation and signature 2. greeting / salutation 3. closing statement ......... ......... ......... 4. introductory paragraph 5. main content paragraphs 6. subject ......... ......... ......... B. Read the sentences about formal email etiquette and circle the correct words. 1. You should / shouldn't write in a formal style when writing a letter of application. 2. You should / shouldn't always say what the email is about in the subject box. 3. You should / shouldn't write a full sentence in the subject box. 4. You should / shouldn't address a potential employer by their first name. 5. You should / shouldn't leave a space between paragraphs. 6. You should / shouldn't use full words instead of contractions. 7. You should / shouldn't use abbreviations. 8. You should / shouldn't write whole words in capital letters. 9. You should / shouldn't use exclamation marks. 10. You should / shouldn't always sign the email with your full name. T each-This.com © 2021 Permission granted to reproduce for classroom use. WORKSHEETS, ACTIVITIES & GAMES

Page 3:
EMAILING Email Etiquette C. Answer the following multiple-choice questions by ticking the correct answers. 1. Which two greetings are suitable for a formal email? a. Dear Sir ...... b. Hi Bill ...... c. Dear Mr. Brown ...... d. Hey there ...... 2. Which two closing salutations are suitable for a formal email? a. Yours sincerely ...... b. Regards ...... c. Take care ...... d. See you ...... D. Read the email responding to the advertisement below and circle the mistakes. Wanted! Full-time manager for busy London sports equipment store. Experience and good communication skills essential. Send CV and photo to davidpercy@sportstuff.org. To: davidpercy@sportstuff.org From: jerry.jones@gmail.com Subject: I really, really want this job. Hey David, I'm writing about the ad for a store manager for Sportstuff listed on the Findajob website. I'm 21 and I've just FINISHED high school! I'm fluent in English and French and have several year's retail experience. I think I'd be a good candidate for this job because I'm hardworking and enjoy interacting with customers. I'm also knowledgeable about sports and athletic equipment. See you later. Yours Jerry E. Now, write your own job application email to the same advertisement. To: From: Subject: T each-This.com © 2021 Permission granted to reproduce for classroom use. WORKSHEETS, ACTIVITIES & GAMES

