Page 1:
TELEPHONE ETIQUETTE AND CUSTOMER SERVICE Training Materials for BYU-Idaho Employees BYU-I DAHO HUMAN RESOURCES Kimball Building #226 Rexburg, Idaho (208) 496-1700 www.byui.edu/human-resources Last rev.: Jan. 2014

Page 2:
Page | 2 7 ESSENTIAL GUIDELINES FOR TELEPHONE USE AT BYU-IDAHO 1. Every primary office line should be answered by a “live” person; not by voice mail. Problem: Employees, students, parents, visitors, and vendors often have a difficult time finding a “live” person to assist them via the phone. Solution: Do not use phone mail on primary office lines. Where phone mail is deemed appropriate, as determined by line management, it should be used efficiently and effectively to meet the needs of the caller (i.e. short, effective messages with the option to speak to a “live” person). 2. When the telephone rings, answer it promptly. Problem: At times, when employees leave their office, no one answers their phone. Solution 1: Ask a co-worker to answer your phone when you are away from your desk. Solution 2: If you are out of the office for an extended period of time, make arrangements with fellow co-workers to cover telephone duties. Problem: Oftentimes calls are not answered until the third, fourth, or fifth ring. Solution: Briefly excuse yourself from any face-to-face conversation and answer each call before the third ring (once you have answered the telephone, you have the option of placing the caller on hold). 3. Take responsibility for the calls that you answer. Don’t forward a problem to someone, that you can resolve yourself. Problem: Frequently callers are transferred (often multiple times) to others before getting the assistance they need. Solution: Help each caller to find resolution to his/her problem in an effective and efficient manner. Where necessary ask the caller if you can place him/her on “hold” while you find the answer to their question or ask them for a number where you can call them back. 4. Inform others when you are transferring a call to them. Problem: Callers who get transferred (especially multiple times) tend to get irritated and frustrated. Solution 1: Inform others that the call you are forwarding is a transfer call. This gives the recipient the “heads-up” so they may be especially understanding and helpful to the individual who is calling. Solution 2: Place the caller on “hold” while you place calls to get necessary information to assist the caller.

Page 3:
Page | 3 5. Return phone messages within one working day. Problem: Oftentimes messages do not get returned in a timely manner or do not get returned at all. Solution: Return all calls within one working day. 6. Answer and place calls in a kind and professional manner. Problem: Many people who initiate calls to others do not tell the recipients who they are. Solution: Let people know who you are immediately – at the beginning of the conversation. Problem: Some employees answer the phone improperly and are curt, cold, rude, or argumentative with the caller. Solution: Learn good telephone etiquette and remember to be kind and helpful to the caller. Remember that callers can detect your disposition very quickly. 7. Go the extra-mile to serve customers, whether by phone or in person. Problem: Mediocre or poor customer service, or doing “just enough to get by.” Solution: Commit yourself to going the extra-mile in service to others. Prepare yourself physically (rest, nutrition, exercise) and mentally to give good customer service. Focus on “people” versus “tasks.” Exceed the expectations of those you assist. Please Note Due to privacy issues, home phone numbers should not be given out by campus employees. If necessary, a campus employee may act as a go-between for a caller and the person he/she wishes to contact. It is recommended that campus employees adhere to the following steps: a. Find out what the issue is. b. Place the call to the home number to see if the employee wants to talk with the individual placing the call.

Page 4:
Page | 4 THE BASICS: TELEPHONE ETIQUETTE SKILLS FOR BYU-IDAHO EMPLOYEES Whenever an employee answers a telephone, he or she represents the employer. To the person on the other end of the line, each of us represents BYU-Idaho. We may be the initial contact or only contact a person has with the university. 1. Suggestions for Answering the Telephone at BYU-Idaho • Answer the phone promptly. • Identify your department and then identify yourself; e.g. "Chemistry Department; this is Janeal." • Speak with a smile in your voice. If you smile when speaking on the phone, your tone of voice is more welcoming and friendly. • Show interest in the caller and their problems. • Be of service and offer assistance. • Be informed about BYU-Idaho, its services, and personnel. Have basic materials and information readily available for reference. Become an informed person so that you may be of help to others. • Make referrals to other people and departments properly. Offer to transfer the call, making sure to always give the number you are referring them to in case you get disconnected. • If you must put a person on hold, ask permission first and only keep them on hold for about 45 seconds before checking back with them. • If the person that was being called is not available, say, "I’m sorry; Beth is not available right now. May I help you with something?" • Take messages clearly and correctly. Telephone messages must be taken carefully and delivered promptly. Taking a message requires: (1) being polite and professional on the telephone and (2) recording all the facts correctly. Double check spelling and numbers with the caller. 2. Suggestions for Making Telephone Calls from BYU-Idaho • Make sure you know where and whom you are calling. Have the correct number. • Identify yourself; e.g. "Hello, my name is Liz Smith. I am the office assistant of the Biology Department at BYU-Idaho." • Be prepared. If you have several items to discuss, make a list beforehand so you will not forget anything important. Have any necessary information nearby, and get to the point of your call. • If the person you are calling sounds busy, ask if you may call back at a more convenient time. • Make use of available technology such as answering machines and voice mail if no one is available to speak with. 3. Suggestions for Dealing with Angry Callers • Demonstrate sincere sympathy and understanding. Say something like, "I’m sorry about that; tell me what happened." • Express a willingness to help. • Listen. Take notes to help you remember important details. • Make a commitment to help, and then keep your promise.

Page 5:
Page | 5 TELEPHONE COURTESIES (Author unknown) 1. Identify yourself by announcing your name or the name of your department, instead of just "hello". 2. Speak directly into the mouthpiece—one inch from your mouth—so that your voice will be clear and you can be understood. Speak clearly and enunciate your words. 3. Use your hold button. Unless you cover both ends of the handset, your voice is still transmitted and you will be heard. 4. Before you put a caller on hold, ask for permission to do so. Do not leave the phone for more than 1 minute. 5. Speak with enthusiasm – smile into the receiver, because your voice will reflect your attitude. 6. 55% of communication is non-verbal. For this reason, it is important to develop good listening and verbal skills to compensate for the lack of eye contact, facial expressions, and gestures. 7. Use the other person's name often. People like to hear their name. 8. Use good grammar and diction; avoid slang. Gum chewing destroys good diction. 9. Speak slowly enough to be easily understood. 10. Be informed about your business, its services and personnel, and have basic materials and information readily available for reference. Make referrals to other people and departments properly. 11. End the conversation with a definite "goodbye" or any other expression which leaves no doubt that the conversation is ended. 12. Who should hang up first? Let the person calling hang up first. 13. Hang up the receiver gently.

Page 6:
Page | 6 VOICE MAIL GUIDELINES • If at all possible, do not use voice mail on campus phones. • If you feel that you need to use voice mail, learn how to properly use it. • Avoid using the "system greeting"; record a personal message and keep your message up-to-date. • When recording a greeting, use appropriate message, tone, etc. • Avoid "dead end" messages (messages where callers have no option to speak to a "live" person). • Keep your voice mail box empty (many people have mail boxes that are full). CALL PROCESSING SYSTEMS (I.E. “DECISION TREES”) 1. Definition of Call Processing • A method in which an automated "decision tree" is created on a phone line that forwards callers (depending on the numbers they push on the key pad) to various numbers or "listen only" boxes. 2. Pros of Call Processing • Processing is consistent from one call to another and allows people to access information 24/7. • Automated systems can answer redundant questions, freeing up time for those creating the system to work on other issues. 3. Cons of Call Processing • Removes the "personal touch" from the transaction. • Is frustrating to callers who know who they want to talk to, but may have to go through an elaborate processing system first. • Makes it difficult for fellow co-workers to do regular business with one another. 4. Tips for the Appropriate Use of Call Processing • Don't use call processing as a maneuver to discourage people from calling your office. • Consider what customers want and need (i.e. determine what is good customer service). • Make menu options as brief as possible. Long messages are frustrating to customers. • Keep the number of options that you create on your system to a minimum. • Never end a greeting without giving the caller an option to speak with a "live" person. 5. Call Processing at BYU-Idaho • Call processing at BYU-Idaho must be approved by line management.

Page 7:
Page | 7 TELEPHONE ETIQUETTE SURVEY (Comments about telephone etiquette from a survey conducted on the BYU-Idaho campus) • Identify who you are at the beginning of the conversation. • Use good telephone etiquette with people on campus as well as off campus. • Don't interrupt people when they are speaking. Let them finish their sentence or idea. • If you are not able to speak with the person you called, don't pry. For example, it would be inappropriate to say "Oh, is John off today?" • Always identify yourself when you answer the phone and when you call someone—by university department and by your name. (Remember that not everyone has caller ID, and those who do sometimes still don't know who you are.) • Pick up the phone with a smile. Be happy! • Put some personality into answering the phone; please, no monotone or acting as though you are bored. • If you don't know the answer to the caller's question, acknowledge it. Don't make up something or try to sound like you do know the answer. • Try to help the person calling by looking up a phone number, transferring the call to the right person, or find out the correct information, versus telling them they have the wrong number or transferring them to anyone just to get rid of them. • Please treat the caller with respect and courtesy. • Please treat the person you call with respect and courtesy. • Never hang up on someone just because you are finished with the conversation. • Apologize if you dialed a wrong number and be understanding if they dialed you incorrectly. • Don't convey an "I'm an important person" attitude. We are all important people. • Use respectful and considerate words and phrases, such as:  "I'm sorry."  "Thank you."  "Please."  "May I take a message?"  "Would you like to leave your number?"  "May I put you on hold?"  "I'm sorry to keep you waiting."  "He's away from his desk. May I have him return your call?" • Don't use words and phrases such as:  "Huh?"  "Yeah."  "I don't know where he is."  "She's at lunch. Call back later."  "He's not here."  "I don't know where he is or when he'll be back." • When you receive a transfer call say: "This is (your name). May I help you?" (No need to reintroduce the university again.) • After asking a caller to hold for the person they are calling for, be sure to say "You're welcome" after their customary "Thank you." It shows that you are truly listening to them and not in "receptionist mode."

Page 8:
Page | 8 • I think it is really important to be sure and tell the person on the other end what you are going to do, such as: "If you'll hang on just a minute, I'll see if I can find an answer," or "I'm going to transfer you to another area" (then give them the number where you are transferring them in case the call is disconnected in the transfer.) • Always remember that what the person is asking is extremely important to them (although it may not seem important to you), so treat them as if they are the only person you have to deal with. • Remember that the phone is not more important than the person standing in front of you; be sure to acknowledge the person standing in front of you and let them know that you will be with them as soon as possible. • Ask people if it is okay to put them on hold. Their time is valuable too and maybe they would rather leave a message. • Ask for permission to transfer a person to a voice messaging system. Some people don't like to talk to machines. They would rather leave a message or call back. • Repeat telephone numbers to make sure you have copied them correctly. • Take the person's name and number and call them back if you think it could take longer than a minute or two to research the answer or find the right person to handle the call. • As a general rule, you should not transfer a call and hang up before making sure someone is on the other end to handle the call. • Always be aware of your tone of voice at all times. Be cheerful without being fake, gushy, or silly. Speak clearly, and if you are wearing a headset, make sure the microphone is directly in front of your mouth. • Do not be speaking to someone else when you pick up the phone. • If you need to find some information or ask a question to someone in your office, put the person on the phone on hold instead of just setting the phone down. • If you put someone on hold, do not leave them there for longer than 60 seconds without giving them more information or asking if they are willing to continue holding. • Don't sound impatient or put-out. • Try to be as helpful as you possibly can. Put yourself in the caller's position. • Don't interrupt others who are talking on the phone. If it becomes necessary to interrupt a call, simply hand the person who is speaking on the phone a handwritten note. • Always end your conversation by saying "good-bye." Not "bye, bye" or "see ya." Good-bye is a formal ending and very professional. • Always repeat a person's name and phone number before hanging up. Then the person has a chance to correct any mistakes. Remember too that it is important to obtain needed information by asking polite questions, such as: "Could you spell that for me?" or "Would you mind repeating that for me?" When you use words or commands such as "spell that for me," or "say it again," it puts the other person in a defensive mood. • No matter how rude the person is on the other end of the line, we need to remember that we are representing BYU-Idaho and have to do our best to be "polite" and "helpful." • Whenever I answer the phone I try to put myself in the other person's shoes. How would I like to be treated? • If a person is getting upset, I always try to remember that it's probably not me that they are mad at.

Page 9:
Page | 9 CUSTOMER SERVICE: POINTS TO REMEMBER (Reference: Adapted from John Tschohl, Connections, Copyright 1989, Published by Better than Money Corporation, Bloomington, MN, emphasis added) • Each of us needs the help and support of others. • Dealing with people is a special part of our lives. • Students want to be treated as friends. • We need positive communication. The more we receive, the better we feel. • We dislike poor service because it makes us feel unimportant. • Living up to the service expectations of others benefits everyone. • Students we serve notice our attitudes and feelings no matter how hard we try to hide them. • To deal successfully with others, we must first deal successfully with ourselves. • Feel good about yourself. You’re a very special person. • We are not numbers, we are individuals. • Treating people like numbers is poor service. • Treating people as individuals is quality service. • Treat people as you would like to be treated. • Quality work and good service are valuable. • Belief in the value of what we do produces commitment. • Commitment is vital to producing quality work and good service to students. • Each job in the school contributes in an important way to the well-being and success of students. • People value courtesy, honesty, openness, and fair play. • Each of us has the ability and the responsibility to find ways to improve what we do and the way we do it. • Every day, we need to improve what we do and the way we do it. • We all know the basic elements of courtesy we need to practice on a regular basis. • Consistent positive communication is the key to quality service. • Remembering and using a person’s name sends a strong positive message of acknowledgment. • People don’t like to wait, so prompt efficient service is quality service. • Everyone should be eager to respond to students regardless of status or position. • Compliments build confidence. • The words we say are only a small part of how we communicate. Actions also leave lasting impressions. • Tone of voice is a big part of communication.

Page 10:
Page | 10 • Body language—a smile, or making eye contact — is an important part of face-to-face communication. • “Image” is made up of many things, but the most important factor is what we do and how we handle interpersonal communication. • What people believe to be true about us is more important to them than what may be actually true. • Practicing warmth, friendliness, honesty, patience, tact, courtesy, and promptness with others will result in positive responses from them. • We must all set and consistently try to meet an individual standard of excellence. • Asking others about their needs is quality service. • Listening carefully is one method of providing quality service. • Asking questions and listening to the answers makes our work easier. • There are specific techniques we use on the telephone that convey respect and caring to students and parents. • Learning all we can about our school and our own responsibilities makes our job easier. • Satisfying the needs of students is the most important objective of any school. • Everyone has some fear of interaction with others because everyone is afraid of negative responses. • We all deserve friendliness. • “Students” aren’t the only customers coming into our school. Everyone we deal with is a customer. • We control the workplace environment. • The workplace environment is critical to the success of any school. • All of us respond to positive communication. Positive communication is just as important with fellow employees as it is with our students. • Warm, sincere “Positive Strokes” enhance the work environment. • Showing appreciation to those we work for also improves the work environment. • Although complaints aren’t pleasant, they do tell us how we can improve. • Don’t be afraid to take responsibility. • Don’t be afraid to apologize. • If you can, explain why the problem occurred. • Don’t challenge the complaint directly. • Don’t allow yourself to be intimidated; remain cool, collected, courteous, and helpful. • Don‘t get involved in fault-finding. • Don’t blame somebody else. • Don’t let your personal feelings get in the way. • Remember: The goal is to solve the problem.

Page 11:
Page | 11 CONTINUE THE CONVERSATION: GREAT BOOKS TO READ AND DISCUSS 1. Telephone Etiquette • Beyond Hello (Jeannie Davis) • Telephone Skills from A to Z (Nancy Friedman) 2. Customer Service • At America's Service (Karl Albrecht) • Customer Service Training 101 (Renee Evenson) • Delivering Knock Your Socks Off Service (Ron Zemke) • Discovering the Soul of Service (Leonard Berry) • Perfect Phrases for Customer Service (Robert Bacal) 3. Other Helpful Titles • The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People (Stephen Covey) • The Fine Art of Small Talk (Debra Fine) • How to Win Friends and Influence People (Dale Carnegie) • Spiritual Roots of Human Relations (Stephen Covey)

