Page 1:
Johari Window Worksheet

Page 2:
Johari Window Worksheet Finding hidden gems in yourself and others Finding the hidden gems For many of us, the words “blind spot” bring to mind a list of weaknesses of which we are unaware - the “cream cheese” on our faces to which we are oblivious. While blindspots can be considered weaknesses, we also have unknown strengths. These strengths are like gems that are hidden from view. This group activity helps you ﬁnd these strengths accessing the Johari Window through the lens of Positive Psychology. A quick recap The Johari Window is a self-awareness model that represents information about a person such as – their strengths and vulnerabilities, or their thoughts and feelings – in relation to themselves and others, from four perspectives: - Open area: known to yourself and to others - Blind area: others know about you but you are not aware of - Hidden area: know about yourself but which are unknown to others - Unknown area: unknown to you and to others Grow your open area This self-awareness model is dynamic and changes as you provide more information to others, and they give you feedback. You increase what you know about yourself by inviting feedback from others. And you increase what they know about you by sharing information about yourself.

Page 3:
Personal strengths list - Select your top ﬁve strengths from the list of personal strengths below. - Then do the same for each of your team members. ❏ Ambitious ❏ Appreciation for beauty and excellence ❏ Authentic ❏ Brave ❏ Conﬁdent ❏ Creative ❏ Curious ❏ Dedicated ❏ Empathetic ❏ Enthusiastic ❏ Fair ❏ Flexible ❏ Forgiving ❏ Grateful ❏ Honest ❏ Hopeful ❏ Humble ❏ Humorous ❏ Integrity ❏ Inclusive ❏ Kind ❏ Leadership ❏ Learning ❏ Listening ❏ Logical ❏ Motivated ❏ Negotiation skills ❏ Open minded ❏ Optimistic ❏ Peacekeeper ❏ Persistence ❏ Perspective ❏ Prudence ❏ Responsible ❏ Self-controlled ❏ Spirituality ❏ Team player ❏ Time management ❏ Trustworthy ❏ Visionary Plot your Johari Window On the next page is a diagram. Draw it on a blank sheet of paper and plot your strengths. Remember: - Strengths that are on both lists go into the OPEN AREA - Strengths that appear only on an individual's personal list go into the HIDDEN AREA - Strengths that are on others’ lists but not the personal go into the BLIND AREA

Page 4:
OPEN AREA Known to self and to others BLIND AREA Known to others but not self Known to self but not others HIDDEN AREA Unknown to self and others UNKNOWN AREA SELF KNOWLEDGE OTHER’S KNOWLEDGE OF YOU Your Johari Window

