Page 1:
Approved at the 120th Senate meeting 1 SLIIT Academy Higher Diploma in Information Technology MODULE OUTLINE Module Name Professional Skills Module Code IT1215 Version No. 2 Year/Level 2 Semester 2 Credit Points 2 Pre-requisites None Co-requisites None Methods of Delivery Lectures (face to face) 2 Hours/ Week Tutorials 1hour/Week Laboratories -- Course web site https://sam.sliitacademy.lk/ Date of Original Approval Date of Last Approval 2023 Date of Next Review 2024 MODULE DESCRIPTION Aim This module aims at facilitating students with a better understanding of professional and employability skills required in real life situations. Despite the improvement of reading, writing and speaking skills, required for effective communication, students will be able to develop their leadership skills and social skills working through continuous collaborative assignments. Learning Outcomes At the end of the module, the student will be able to: LO1: Define what are employability skills, Identify the skills necessary for employment and Classify workplace skills LO2: Identify the registers and structure of a CV and cover letter and write a cover letter and compose a CV with reference to a job advertisement. LO3: Display effective interview skills LO4: Develop negotiating skills and problem-solving skills in given situations and use them practically in meetings LO5: Classify different types of reports and their purposes and compose project proposals. LO6: Recognize different types of oral presentations and develop public speaking skills and confidence through debates and

Page 2:
Approved at the 120th Senate meeting 2 presentations. LO7: Identify the grammatical and lexical resources used in process writing and giving technical instructions. LO8: Demonstrate emotional intelligence and self-awareness LO9: Apply suitable styles and patterns of writing in English on the various tasks assigned. L10: Identify the professional jargon used in everyday professional conversations while developing speaking and listening skills. Develop effective writing skills and email etiquettes required for business correspondence L11: Demonstrate understanding of basic research concepts, research design and ethics. L12: Display professional behavior in formal situations and demonstrate awareness in existing social decorum. Assessment Criteria Assessment Description: Assessment Activities: 100% Assignment 50% LO1,LO2, LO3,LO4,LO 11,LO12 Final Portfolio 50% LO1-LO12 Total 100 % Estimated Student Workload Contact Hours Lectures (face to face) 42 hours Tutorials -- Laboratory None Time Allocated for Assessments Continuous Assessments 04 Hours End evaluation and final portfolio 24 Hours Reading and Independent Study 30 Hours Total 100 Hours Module Pass Requirements Learning Resources Recommended Texts Software

Page 3:
Approved at the 120th Senate meeting 3 CONTENTS OF THE MODULE 1. Introduction to Professional skills  Define what are employability skills.  Identify the skills necessary for employment  Classify workplace skills  Values, Beliefs, Attitudes and character LO1 2. CV writing and writing cover letters  Identify the structure of a CV and cover letter.  Recognize the registers use in cover letter writing.  Distinguish between CV and resume.  Write a cover letter with reference to a job advertisement.  Compose a professional CV . LO2 3 Interview Skills  Identify the basic components of interviews  Demonstrate effective interview skills  conduct mock interviews LO3 4 Negotiation skills  Examine the types of negotiating skills  Importance of negotiation skills for professional development LO4 5 Introduction to portfolio writing  classify different types of portfolios  How to write self-reflective portfolio  Create a portfolio (Assignment) LO5 6 Team leadership Skills  Team development stages  Team leadership  Problem solving  Decision making LO6

Page 4:
Approved at the 120th Senate meeting 4  Embrace diversity in teams, organization and society 7 Facilitating and Conducting meetings  Develop writing skills related to meeting. (Writing minutes/ structuring an agenda)  Write a standard process referring the given instructions.  Organize effective meetings LO7 8 Emotional Intelligence  Introduction to emotional intelligence  Self-awareness  Self-management  Social awareness  Relationship management LO8 9 Personal development planning  SWOT Analysis  Strategies for personal development L09 10 Professional etiquettes in workplace/Telephone etiquettes/email netiquettes /code of ethics  Identify the professional jargon used in telephone conversations.  Develop effective listening skills and speaking skills.  Construct effective conversations  Professional responsibility and code of Ethics Develop effective writing skills and email etiquettes required for business correspondence L10 11 Importance of conducting research. /Basic components of a research paper.  Identify the structure of a research paper.  Demonstrate understanding of basic research concepts, research design and ethics. ·  Refer sample research papers and construct an abstract. L11 12 Dining etiquettes / Grooming Etiquettes  Display professional behaviour in formal situations.  Critically discuss social decorum.  Dress appropriately in professional contexts L12 GENERIC INFORMATION Any type of plagiarism is not allowed. Plagiarism: Academic honesty is crucial to a student’s credibility and self-esteem, and ultimately reflects the values and morals of the Institute as whole. A student may work together with one or a group of students discussing assignment content, identifying relevant references, and debating issues relevant to the subject. Plagiarism occurs when the work of

Page 5:
Approved at the 120th Senate meeting 5 another person, or persons, is used and presented as one’s own. END OF MODULE OUTLINE Abstract writing – research paper writing part for them

