Page 1:
Ethics checklist Decision-making workflow Are the facts relevant? If NO — Don’t go any further If YES go to STEP 2. If NO — Don’t go any further If YES go to STEP 4. If NO — Go to STEP 7 (if internal escalation doesn’t resolve issue or is not possible). If YES — If internal escalation resolves issue then don’t go any further. If NO — Go to STEP 8 (if advice doesn’t resolve issue or is not possible) If YES — If advice resolves issue then don’t go any further. If NO — Go to STEP 9 (if disassociating doesn’t resolve issue or is not possible). If YES — If disassociation resolves issue then don’t go any further. End Go to STEP 5. Go to STEP 6. If NO — Go to STEP 3. If YES Go to STEP 6 or STEP 9. Consider which fundamental principles are engaged. Identify the affected parties. Check your information. Does the issue persist? Identify those impacted. Does this feel unethical? Disassociate from unresolvable or unethical conflicts. Identify impacted fundamental principals. Is it illegal or unlawful in the relevant jurisdiction? Decide possible course of action. Seek professional advice. Report as necessary. 1 5 3 8 4 7 2 6 9

Page 2:
Verify the facts you believe to be relevant — and keep notes where possible a. Identify the relevant facts. Consider the circumstances. What do you know? What do you suspect? Identify the difference between the two. b. What would be required to identify the facts? Be proportionate. Be reasonable in your attempts. c. Do not take word of mouth or assumptions on face value. d. Can anybody else help verify the facts? a. Who are the individuals, organisations and key stakeholders affected? b. In what way are they impacted? c. Are there conflicts between different stakeholders? d. Understand the effects of non-action — to the organisation, to yourself and to society. Have you considered the ethical issues involved? a. How might the average person feel if you saw it in the media? b. How would the business’s reputation be affected if it were in the public domain? c. How might the average person feel about your peers, friends, family knowing about it? How would the average person feel about it? d. Have you referred to the CIMA ® Code of Ethics? e. Have you referred to your organisation’s internal Code of Conduct and other internal policies? f. Does it feel wrong? Refuse to remain associated with the activity and explain why you cannot remain associated with the activity a. Consider whether there is any other action you can take before disassociating. b. If resolution seems unlikely, disengage from the issue — in writing if necessary. c. Legal advice m ay be needed if this affects your employment status or if you are implicated in any way with the issue. d. There may be ways in which you can explain why you cannot be associated (in ways that come across as helpful, such as, writing a blog on the benefits of disassociating when necessary) e. In certain circumstances, a failure to disassociate could risk a breach of the Code of Ethics. Consider which fundamental principles are engaged a. Integrity b. Objectivity c. Professional competence and due care d. Confidentiality e. Professional behaviour Is it illegal/unlawful in the relevant jurisdiction? a. Is the issue in question regulated by the law — national and/or international? b. Does it comply with regulations in the relevant jurisdictions? c. How would you go about finding out? Identify possible courses of action a. Have a conversation internally, raise issue with your line manager if possible. b. Is there anyone else you can speak with? (e.g., another manager, in-house legal, auditors) c. Keep a personal record of every action you take to resolve the dilemma. d. Are any individuals potentially being scapegoated? a. CIMA ethics helpline is free to members and students. b. Your organisation may have an internal, confidential, speaking up helpline a. There may be organisations that you can report to anonymously — e.g. the tax authority, law enforcement or fraud organisations (keep in mind differing authorities in different jurisdictions) Identify those affected. Does this feel unethical? Disassociate from unresolvable or unethical conflicts. Identify impacted fundamental principals. Is it illegal or unlawful in the relevant jurisdiction? Decide possible course of action. Seek professional advice. Report as necessary. 1 5 3 8 4 7 2 6 9 Check your information. Does the issue persist? Ethics checklist Decision-making workflow — (expanded) © 2025 The Chartered Institute of Management Accountants. All rights reserved. CIMA and The Chartered Institute of Management Accountants are trademarks of The Chartered Institute of Management Accountants and are registered in the United Kingdom and other countries. The design mark is a trademark owned by the Association of International Certified Professional Accountants and licensed to CIMA. 2508-373471

